validate emails (#201)
andycroll/andycroll.com: _posts/2024/2024-02-26-validate-email-addresses.md

---
title: "Validate Email Addresses"
description: "There’s a surprising number of ways to do it"
layout: article
category: ruby
date: 2024-02-26 06:00
image:
  base: "2024/validate-email-addresses"
  alt: "Envelopes"
  credit: "Joanna Kosinska"
  source: "https://unsplash.com/photos/envelope-paper-lot-uGcDWKN91Fs"
---

> Ensuring you have data that makes sense is why Rails provides [validations](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/active_record_validations.html) through the Active Model library that underpins Active Record.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ensuring you have data that makes sense is why Rails provides [validations](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/active_record_validations.html) through the Active Model library, which underpins Active Record.
```

> Making sure you can email your users is one of the most important thing to get right in your application, so you probably already have validation checks around your `User#email` attribute.

Reviewer: *things

Author: ```suggestion
Making sure you can email your users is one of the most important things to get right in your application, so you probably already have validation checks around your `User#email` attribute.
```

> Making sure you can email your users is the most important thing to get right in your application, so you probably already have validation checks around your `User#email` attribute to make your communications will get through.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Making sure you can email your users is one of the most important thing to get right in your application, so you probably already have validation checks around your `User#email` attribute.
```

## Instead of…

> …inventing your own regular expression, or using this one from the [older Rails docs](https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveModel/Validations/ClassMethods.html#method-i-validates).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
…inventing your own regular expression, or using this one from the [older Rails docs](https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveModel/Validations/ClassMethods.html#method-i-validates):
```

```ruby
class User < ApplicationRecord
  validates :email,
    format: { with: /\A([^@\s]+)@((?:[-a-z0-9]+\.)+[a-z]{2,})\z/i },
    presence: true,
    uniqueness: { case_insensitive: true }
end
```

## Use…

> …one of several decent options:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
…one of these several better options:
```

### Devise

> Which might be a good choice, if you’re already using it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Definitely a good choice, if you’re already using it for user authentication.
```

Author: ```suggestion
A reasonable choice, if you’re already using it for user authentication.
```

Author: Not definitely.

```ruby
class User < ApplicationRecord
  validates :email,
    format: { with: Devise.email_regexp },
    presence: true,
    uniqueness: { case_insensitive: true }
end
```

### `URI`

> There has been a regular expression built into the `URI` of Ruby‘s standard library since version 2.2. Here's the [commit adding it](https://github.com/ruby/ruby/commit/e63ab5d3ad289767eab49787e4e33390b0ce74e1)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There has been a regular expression built into the `URI` of Ruby‘s standard library since version 2.2. Here's the [commit adding it](https://github.com/ruby/ruby/commit/e63ab5d3ad289767eab49787e4e33390b0ce74e1).
```

```ruby
class User < ApplicationRecord
  validates :email,
    format: { with: URI::MailTo::EMAIL_REGEXP },
    presence: true,
    uniqueness: { case_insensitive: true }
end
```

> It's been in some of the [Rails Guides examples](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/active_record_validations.html#custom-validators)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's been in some of the [Rails Guides examples](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/active_record_validations.html#custom-validators).
```

### `email_address` gem

The validator from the [`email_address` gem](https://github.com/afair/email_address) has other useful enhancements for working with email.

You can use the built-in validator:

```ruby
class User < ApplicationRecord
  validates :email,
    presence: true,
    uniqueness: { case_insensitive: true }

  # attribute needs to be called :email
  validates_with EmailAddress::ActiveRecordValidator
end
```

Or directly use the gem‘s functionality in a `validate` block:

```ruby
class User < ApplicationRecord
  validates :email,
    presence: true,
    uniqueness: { case_insensitive: true }

  validate do |user|
    EmailAddress::Address.new(user.email).valid?
  end
end
```

Or use a [custom validator](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/active_record_validations.html#custom-validators):

```ruby
class User < ApplicationRecord
  validates :email,
    email: true,
    presence: true,
    uniqueness: { case_insensitive: true }

  private

>   # You can put this in it’s own file if you check elsewhere for email validity

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  # You can put this in its own file if you check elsewhere for email validity
```

  class EmailValidator < ActiveModel::EachValidator
    def validate_each(record, attribute, value)
      unless EmailAddress::Address.new(value).valid?
        record.errors.add attribute, (options[:message] || "is not an email")
      end
    end
  end
end
```

## Why?

> Email formatting is a solved problem. _Re_-solving solved problems always feels like madness to me, why would you not lean on the experience of the entire Internet for something as common as this?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Email formatting is a solved problem. _Re_-solving solved problems always feels like madness to me. Why would you not lean on the experience of the entire Internet for something as common as this?
```

> There are various levels of strictness in the regular expressions that underpin the different options I listed above. Most of them are "healthily conventional” in comparison to the [official RFC](https://github.com/afair/email_address?tab=readme-ov-file#avoiding-the-bad-parts-of-rfc-specification) format of emails, which can allow overly unrealistic, but RFC-valid, machine generated email addresses.

Reviewer: *machine-generated

Author: ```suggestion
There are various levels of strictness in the regular expressions that underpin the different options I listed above. Most of them are "healthily conventional” in comparison to the [official RFC](https://github.com/afair/email_address?tab=readme-ov-file#avoiding-the-bad-parts-of-rfc-specification) format of emails, which can allow overly unrealistic, but RFC-valid, machine-generated email addresses.
```

> There’s various levels of strictness in the regular expressions that underpin the different options I listed above. Most of them are "healthily conventional” in comparison to the [official RFC](https://github.com/afair/email_address?tab=readme-ov-file#avoiding-the-bad-parts-of-rfc-specification) format of emails, which can allow overly unrealistic, but RFC-valid, machine generated email addresses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are various levels of strictness in the regular expressions that underpin the different options I listed above. Most of them are "healthily conventional” in comparison to the [official RFC](https://github.com/afair/email_address?tab=readme-ov-file#avoiding-the-bad-parts-of-rfc-specification) format of emails, which can allow overly unrealistic, but RFC-valid, machine generated email addresses.
```

Reviewer: This paragraph feels a lil' jumbly.

> If I were to pick I’d choose the straightforward `URI` option, the underlying regular expression is sufficiently flexible for all regular use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If I were to pick, I’d choose the straightforward `URI` option. The underlying regular expression is sufficiently flexible for all regular use.
```

> However, if I was looking to use the [extra functionality](https://github.com/afair/email_address?tab=readme-ov-file#usage) of the `email_address` gem—domain extraction or detection, normalisation or deconstruction—I’d use

Reviewer: Huh? Is this paragraph unfinished?

Author: ```suggestion
However, if I was looking to use the [extra functionality](https://github.com/afair/email_address?tab=readme-ov-file#usage) of the `email_address` gem—domain extraction or detection, normalisation or deconstruction—I’d select one of the approaches using that gem.
```

> However, if I was looking to use the [extra functionality](https://github.com/afair/email_address?tab=readme-ov-file#usage) of the `email_address` gem—domain extraction or detection, normalisation or deconstruction—I’d select one of the approaches using that gem.

Reviewer: This still feels a bit clunky/confusing.

Author: ```suggestion
If my application needed further email manipulation functionality—detection, normalisation or deconstruction–I'd be tempted to include the `email_address` gem and use it for validation too.
```

> If I was validating emails in other places in my application I would certainly consider the custom validator approach as it can be re-used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If I were validating emails in multiple other places in my application I would certainly consider the custom validator approach instead.
```

Author: ```suggestion
If I were validating emails in multiple other places in my application I would certainly consider the—reusable—custom validator approach instead.
```

## Why not?

> The different levels of strictness (and differences in the underlying regular expressions) provided by the options above might cause validation issues for existing records if you’ve been using a hand-rolled option and change the specifications of email validation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The different levels of strictness (and differences in the underlying regular expressions) provided by the options above might cause validation issues for existing records if you’ve been using a hand-rolled option and then change the specifications of email validation.
```

However, it _might_ still be worth doing the work to make sure all your email addresses do validate with the new regular expression.

> If you’re starting a new app, just pick one of the decent solutions over doing your own thing, unless you have a _really_ good reason.

Reviewer: What would that really good reason be??

Author: ```suggestion
If you’re starting a new app, just pick one of the decent solutions over doing your own thing, unless you have very specific email requirements that fall outside of conventional use.
```
